---
title: Single Sign-On (SSO) and Central Authentication Service(CAS)
date: 2023-03-29 23:47:43
tags: 
    - SSO
    - CAS
    - OAuth
categories: Technology
---

# Introduction

Single Sign-On (SSO) is a widely used authentication technique that allows users to log in once and access multiple applications without having to enter their credentials repeatedly. It saves time and effort for users and increases security for applications. 

# What is Single Sign-On?

Single Sign-On (SSO) is an authentication mechanism that allows a user to access multiple applications with a single set of credentials. Once the user is authenticated, they do not need to re-enter their credentials to access other applications that support SSO. The user’s identity is verified only once, and the user is granted access to all the authorized applications.

# Benefits of Single Sign-On

- Reduced login times: Users no longer need to remember and enter multiple sets of credentials, reducing login times.
- Improved user experience: SSO simplifies the login process for users, improving their experience.
- Increased security: With SSO, the user’s credentials are verified only once, reducing the risk of credential theft.
- Reduced management costs: SSO reduces the number of credentials that need to be managed, simplifying the management process.
Token and Credential

```Tokens``` and ```credentials``` are two important concepts in SSO. A token is a piece of data that represents a user’s identity, and it is used to grant access to an application. A credential is a piece of data that a user provides to prove their identity.

In SSO, a user’s credentials are verified once, and a token is issued to represent their identity. This token is then used to grant access to other applications that support SSO. The user’s credentials are never transmitted to other applications, reducing the risk of credential theft.

# Solutions
There're many technologies used for authentication and authorization. 

1. CAS (Central Authentication Service): CAS is a single sign-on (SSO) protocol that allows users to authenticate once with a central authentication server and then access multiple applications without having to log in again. CAS uses a ticket-granting server (TGS) to issue tickets to authenticated users, which can be used to access different applications.

2. OAuth (Open Authorization): OAuth is an open standard for authorization that allows users to grant third-party applications access to their resources without sharing their login credentials. OAuth uses access tokens to grant access, and users can revoke those tokens at any time.

3. OpenID: OpenID is a decentralized authentication protocol that allows users to authenticate with multiple websites using a single set of login credentials. OpenID relies on the concept of identity providers (IDPs) that can authenticate users and provide their identity information to websites that support OpenID.

4. LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol): LDAP is a protocol used for accessing and managing directory information, such as user account information. LDAP is often used for authentication and authorization in enterprise environments, where user account information is stored in a directory service such as Active Directory.

4. SAML (Security Assertion Markup Language): SAML is an XML-based standard for exchanging authentication and authorization data between parties, such as identity providers and service providers. SAML allows users to authenticate once with an identity provider and then access multiple service providers without having to log in again.
   

| <div style="width:90px">Technology</div> | Pros | Cons | Suitable for |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| [CAS]() | Simple to set up and use; supports single sign-on for multiple applications; customizable authentication flow | Limited support for modern authentication standards; requires a central authentication server | Intranet environments or small-scale deployments |
| [OAuth]() | Provides secure and granular authorization controls; supports delegated authorization; widely adopted by modern web applications | Can be complex to set up and configure; may require additional security measures to prevent token theft or misuse | Web and mobile applications with complex authorization requirements |
| OpenID | Supports decentralized authentication; reduces the need for multiple usernames and passwords; customizable authentication flow | Limited support for modern authentication standards; may require additional integration efforts with third-party identity providers | Websites or applications that require authentication with multiple identity providers |
| LDAP | Provides a central directory for user and application information; supports granular access controls; widely used in enterprise environments | Can be complex to set up and maintain; may require additional security measures to prevent unauthorized access or data breaches | Enterprise environments or organizations with a central directory service |
| SAML | Provides secure and standardized authentication and authorization data exchange; supports single sign-on and federated authentication | Can be complex to set up and maintain; may require additional integration efforts with third-party identity providers; limited support for modern authentication standards | Enterprises or organizations with multiple service providers or identity providers that require federated authentication |



